Notes on Dendro:
-take cores or sections, look at thickness and density, distribution of early v/s late wood from conifers
-the most precise on land


how to calculate the strength of THC: difference in c14 dates of pelagic vs benthic foraminifera or U/Th dating of solitary corals.

Explain why lakes in the late Glacial in SW USA? 
Laurentide ice sheet deflected the Polar Jet Stream bringing Pacific moisture to the Great Basin.
Lakes; La Grande Pile in the Vosges region.

yew tree maximum in Grande Pile and Mondsee attributed to warmest temperatures in Eemian, replaced by taiga (boreal forest) of pines.

Powerful, because in the vicinity of Innsbruck, we know that from 16ka BP, the Lanser Lake records pollen from trees (reforestation).

The Ammersee record: temperature in the hypolimnion remains at around 4°C. Residence time of the water is about 3 years. 
Delta 18O of ostracods reflects mean annual temperature (through precipitation?)


D/O event: rapid rise of 8 to 16°C in Greenland, average 4ka duration. 25 in last glacial, Bolling being #1. Doubling of precipitation

Dust in glacial periods?

Use of methane to synchronise the ice cores, due to the very short mixing time of methane in the atmosphere.

Get the cores names right: 

Antarctica: 
Vostok, last interglacial cycle. lake underneath., up to four last interglacials

DOME C, last 8 interglacials.
Antarctic cold reversal not synchronous with greenland younger dryas cold period 14.5 to 12.9 11.7

Important: within dating uncertainty, temperature and CO2 are synchronous.

Methane follows the precession cycle, because it affects monsoon strength and 2/3 of methane variations seen in antarktika come from the tropics.

Antarctic interstadials occur just before Greenland; bipolar see-saw behaviour.

Greenland accumulation : 0.5m metres per year, 0.05 in Antarctica.
1‰ increase in snow/ice d18O value, 1.5°C warming.

Ice-gas age difference: 100 yr to 2600 yr in low precip areas. Finally, 6000 in southern hemisphere during glacials.
